Compared to dogs and hamsters, ferrets are less well known house pets. Their first appearance in the household did not occur until 1969 when veterinarian Dr. Wendy Winstead first owned a ferret as a pet. David Letterman featured Dr. Winstead on his show in the 1980s, thus spurring their popularity as house pets. Since then, many families and famous people have owned ferrets, including Paris Hilton, who used to take her ferret to red-carpet affairs. Ferrets are interesting creatures with a variety of playful behaviors. They are famous for their hoarding behaviors; they are incredibly skilled at hiding anything from toys to their master's slippers. When frightened or playful, ferrets exhibit piloerection, which is an arching of the back. Perhaps their most unusual behavior, however, is the soft clicking noise, known as dooking, made when playing with one another. Ferrets also have a variety of colors and markings. Blaze is a type of coloration that includes dark markings on the face and extremities. Sable and roans refer to how white is mixed in with other fur colors. In a sable coloration, each hair is white with a black tip. In contrast, roans' coats have fully colored hairs mixed in with fully white hairs creating a stippled effect.

Ferrets are carnivorous animals and their diets in the wild consist mostly of small rodents. They are crepuscular, which means they are most active at dawn and dusk. While feral ferrets mark their territories with their own scent, most pet ferrets have been descented by having their anal glands removed. Most pet ferrets, unless being used for breeding, have also been spayed or neutered, meaning their reproductive organs have been surgically removed. Neutered males and spayed females are called gibs and sprites, respectively. An intact (not neutered) male ferret is called a hob, while an intact female is called a jill.

Like all animals, ferrets are susceptible to a variety of diseases and ailments. A common illness is hyperplasia, or adrenal disease. In this disease, the adrenal glands grow, leading to hair loss and increased aggressiveness. Ferrets are also particularly susceptible to epizootic catarrhal enteritis, or inflammation of the intestinal mucous membranes. This is usually caused by a virus, and is first observed as severe weight loss. Finally, ferrets may also display a genetic defect known as Waardenburg syndrome which may be analogous to a genetic disease found in humans. In ferrets, this genetic abnormality is linked with a flat skull, a stripe on the head, and deafness. The analogous defect in humans is less well understood.

Ferrets are supposed to have first originated in Egypt, but the evidence has been disputed. We do know, however, that they were first used by the Romans to hunt rabbits, and are still used for this purpose in the United Kingdom. In the States, they are more common as a house pet, easily surpassing the cat during their peak in popularity in the 1980s. Along with being cute and inquisitive, they also have the added household benefit of chasing away rats and mice! Ferrets are small animals that usually weigh 2-4 pounds, and have a total length of about 20 inches. Their bodies are disproportionately long, with relatively short, 5-inch tails. Despite their daring curiosity, they tend to live from 7 to 10 years, which is quite long for members of their family. Ferrets are from the Mustelidae family. This family, along with ferrets, also includes otters and weasels. This family is most closely related to the Mephitidae family, which includes skunks. This is surprising because ferrets look more similar to mongooses, meerkats, and other members of the Herpestidae family.

When trying to find the origin of the common domesticated ferret, scientists turned to evidence in mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondria are organelles in every cell of the body, and are responsible for creating energy from sugar through cellular respiration. These organelles contain their own DNA, which has a high rate of mutation. Through these mistakes in DNA replication, different versions of mitochondrial DNA have since evolved. Measuring the number of differences in the mitochondrial DNA between two species gives scientists a relatively accurate idea as to how long ago the two species branched off from a common ancestor. Using this mitochondrial DNA evidence, scientists hypothesize that ferrets were domesticated approximately 2,500 years ago. However, archaeological data has shown supposed ferret remains dating

1500 BCE, meaning that ferrets may have been around for approximately 3,500 years. These remains, however, could have been from the descendants of domesticated ferrets, rather than ferrets themselves. Even though there are other breeds of wild ferrets, such as the endangered Black-footed ferret, common domesticated ferrets are believed to have originated from a hybrid of Steepe and European polecats. There is clear evidence that the European polecat is an ancestor of the common ferret, but scientists are still unsure as to whether the Steepe polecat is a direct ancestor as well. In any case, the Steepe polecat, Mustela eversmanii, the European polecat, Mustela putorius, and the common ferret, Mustela putorius furo, are all closely related, even if it is unclear whether the common ferret is a descendent of one or both of the polecats.

Ferrets have a long history of being introduced to new parts of the world by humans. The Shetland Islands currently have the largest population of pure-bred feral ferrets in the world. This is due to the fact that ferrets have no natural predators on these islands. When New Zealand's rabbit population spiraled out of control, humans introduced ferret-polecat hybrids, which then took over the island. They have been used for similar rabbit-hunting purposes as early as 6 BC when Caesar Augustus sent ferrets to the Balearic Islands to control the rabbit plague.

Besides their practical uses, ferrets have also been used in the popular media. Bianca Beauchamp's pet ferrets were featured in her movie "All Access." Jean Follain wrote a 75-word poem, "Death of the Ferret." And Richard Bach authored the Ferret Chronicles, a series of five books that all starred ferrets.

Since their rise in popularity, ferrets have become more understood by the veterinarian community. Ferrets can now be medically treated just as well as other common pets. For example, vets now know that Pedialyte can be given to dehydrated ferrets, just like cats and dogs. Melatonin implants are used to treat adrenal disease, and radiation therapy can be used to treat lymphoma. 