Our solar system was born with the collapse of a giant, spinning molecular cloud. Due to the principles of angular momentum, as the mass shrunk in diameter, it increased in rotational velocity. The center became hotter, and the solar system started to flatten out. As the Sun grew hotter, it became capable of thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen atoms. The Sun increased its mass until the thermal energy balanced out the gravitational contraction, and hydrostatic equilibrium was reached.

Since its birth, our solar system has revolved around a single star: the Sun. The Sun is only one of the many stars in the universe. Stars exist in a variety of colors, ranging from very bright blue-white to red. Class O stars are the brightest, emitting UV light, and class M are the dullest. Our Sun is class G, meaning it is of intermediate intensity and white-yellow in color. The Sun is an undeniable force in our solar system, allowing Earth to support life. The Zodiacal dust cloud within the inner solar system scatters the light from the sun, thus allowing life to flourish by reducing the intensity of the Sun's rays. The heliosphere is the solar wind created by the particles emitted from the Sun. Only the Earth's magnetic field can protect our planet from the plasma of charged particles ejected from the Sun. However, the magnetic field of the Earth can be suddenly disrupted if the solar winds surge and create a geomagnetic storm. These changes in solar winds may be caused by coronal mass ejections, which are sudden spurts of protons, electrons, and ions in the form of a plasma released from the Sun. In contrast, while it has never happened to the sun, stars may explode, causing a supernova.

While the early western world believed the solar system revolved around the Earth, Copernicus, through mathematical models, proposed a heliocentric model for the solar system. Copernicus, however, was not the first to suggest this hypothesis. Arybhata of India, and Aristarchus of Greece before him, both suggested that the Sun is the center of the solar system. Neither of their theories was proven, however, causing them to go unnoticed until Copernicus' mathematical models.

There are only a few major regions of the solar system. The sun is in the center, circled by the 4 inner planets. The asteroid belt separates these planets from the 4 outer planets. The inner planets consist of materials whose melting points are higher than 500 degrees Kelvin, which include metals and silicates. In contrast, hydrogen, helium, and noble gases constitute the outer planets. The bodies in the areas outside Neptune are largely made of gas and ice mixtures, known as volatiles. There are three concentric regions outside Neptune: the Kuiper belt, the scattered disc, and the Oort cloud. The Kuiper belt is just like the asteroid belt, and has ammonia, methane, and water ice. The scattered disc is a little less stable, and may be the birthplace of comets. The Oort cloud, a spherical region containing mostly comets, stretches as far as a lightyear away from the Sun. Relatively little is known about this area, the furthest region of our solar system.

A lot, however, is known about the inner planets. Mercury was first visited by the Mariner 10. As the closest planet to the Sun, Mercury cannot maintain an atmosphere due to the intensity of the solar winds. Venus' atmosphere is also swept away, but it is constantly replenished by frequent eruptions on the planet's surface. This atmosphere of greenhouse gases makes Venus the hottest planet. Earth is able to keep its atmosphere despite the solar winds because of its magnetic field. Mars has an atmosphere as well, but it mostly consists of carbon dioxide.

There are many bodies in our solar system, but only those massive enough to be spherical and have cleared their orbits of other bodies can be considered planets. Dwarf planets are large enough to be spherical, but unlike planets, do not have a clear orbit. Plutoids are a special class of dwarf planets whose orbits are close to that of Neptune. The 5 dwarf planets in our solar system are Pluto, Makemake, Haumea, Eris, and Ceres. Ceres is the closest to the sun, in the asteroid belt. Pluto, Makemake and Haumea are in the Kuiper Belt, which is 30-55 astronomical units (AU) away from the sun. Eris is in the scattered disc, which is 60-100 AU away. Because the Oort cloud's astonishing 2,000-50,000 AU radii, any dwarf planets that may exist there have not yet been discovered.

In our solar system, there are 166 moons total. Of the 8 planets, 6 have moons, as do 3 of the 5 dwarf planets. Therefore, a total of 9 objects house all the moons in our solar system. Saturn has as large proportion of these moons. Titan is the largest and Mimas is the smallest of Saturn's moons. Lapetus has the largest orbit, and is thus the farthest away from Saturn.

Along with having many moons, Saturn is also unique due to its magnificent ring structures. All the outer planets are comprised of gas; Saturn is composed mostly of hydrogen, making it less dense than water. Jupiter is also composed of gas and has a large red spot. Uranus is unique in that its axial tilt is 90 degrees to its ecliptic, meaning it revolves around the sun on its side. Neptune, being the furthest planet from the Sun, has been visited only once, and was first discovered by mathematical predictions rather than direct observation.

Many scientists have been interested in the physics of the solar system. Galileo's theories about bodies in motion lent support to earlier, unproven heliocentric models of the solar system. Newton applied his laws of gravity to the solar system, thus defining the universal laws of gravity. Kepler built on earlier theories to create his laws of planetary motion, and define the elliptical orbits of the planets. Most planets make an elliptical orbit around the sun; its closest point to the sun is known as the perihelion, the furthest the aphelion. The ecliptic is the plane of the Earth's orbit; the planes of most other planets' orbits lie close to this plane. The degree of angle between the orbital plane and a planet's axis of rotation is known as its obliquity. 